README.md, before:

# Data Mesh Manager - AWS Integration

This repository contains a complete setup, which allows you to integrate the [Data Mesh Manager](https://www.datamesh-manager.com/) into  an AWS account.
It uses only serverless AWS functionality like Lambda, CloudWatch, S3, Secretsmanager and SQS.
The infrastructure is set up by using Terraform.

## Limitations
- We do not handle deleted data contracts. So make sure to deactivate data contracts before deleting them. Otherwise, permissions will be kept existent.
- Not all kinds of output ports are supported at this point. Currently, we support the following:
  - S3 Buckets
  - Glue Tables (accessed by using Athena)

## Architecture
For a better understanding of how the integration works, see this simple architecture diagram. Arrows show access direction.

```
                                       ┌─────────────────┐
                                       │                 │
                                       │Data Mesh Manager│
                                       │                 │
                                       └─────────────────┘
                                          ▲           ▲
                                          │           │
                                          │           │
┌─────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                                         │           │                                         │
│                                         │           │ 4. read contract information            │
│                     1. pull events      │           │ 6. write policy information + tag       │
│              ┌──────────────────────────┘           └──────────────────────────┐              │
│              │                                                                 │              │
│              │                                                                 │              │
│              │                                                                 │              │
│     ┌────────┴────────┐                ──────────── ──                ┌────────┴────────┐     │
│     │    poll_feed    │   2. write    │ dmm_events │  │  3. trigger   │  handle_events  │     │
│     │                 ├──────────────►│            │  ├──────────────►│                 │     │
│     │[Lambda Function]│               │ [SQS Queue]│  │               │[Lambda Function]│     │
│     └─────────────────┘                ──────────── ──                └────────┬────────┘     │
│                                                                                │              │
│                                                                                │5. manage     │
│                                                                                │              │
│                                                                                ▼              │
│                                                                        ┌────────────────┐     │
│                                                                        │                │     │
│                                                                        │  IAM Policies  │     │
│                                                                        │                │     │
│                                                                        └────────────────┘     │
│                                                                                               │
│                                                                                               │
│                                                                              [AWS Integration]│
└───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

### Architecture Decision Records
- [adr-001-terraform-and-serverless.md](adr%2Fadr-001-terraform-and-serverless.md)
- [adr-002-idempotent-event-processing.md](adr%2Fadr-002-idempotent-event-processing.md)
- [adr-003-prefer-inline-policies-for-aws-iam.md](adr%2Fadr-003-prefer-inline-policies-for-aws-iam.md)
- [adr-004-save-metadata-to-data-mesh-manager.md](adr%2Fadr-004-save-metadata-to-data-mesh-manager.md)
- [adr-005-fifo-queue-in-sqs.md](adr%2Fadr-005-fifo-queue-in-sqs.md)

## Lambdas
### [Poll Feed](src%2Fpoll_feed%2Flambda_handler.py)
- **Execution:** The function runs every minute, scheduled using an AWS Cloud Watch Rule.
- **Reading Events from Data Mesh Manager:** It reads all unprocessed [events from the Data Mesh Manager API](https://docs.datamesh-manager.com/events). 
- **Sending Events to SQS:** These events are then sent to an SQS queue for further processing. 
- **Tracking Last Event ID:** To ensure proper resumption of processing, the function remembers the last event ID by storing it in an S3 object. This allows subsequent executions of the function to start processing from the correct feed position.

### [Handle Events](src%2Fhandle_events%2Flambda_handler.py)
- **Execution:** The function is triggered by new events in the SQS queue.
- **Filtering Relevant Events:** The function selectively processes events based on their type. It focuses on events of the type `DataContractActivatedEvent` and `DataContractDeactivatedEvent`.
- **DataContractActivatedEvent:** When a `DataContractActivatedEvent` occurs, the function creates IAM policies. These policies allow access from a producing data product's output port to a consuming data product. The data contract in Data Mesh Manager is tagged with `aws-integration` and `aws-integration-active`.
- **DataContractDeactivatedEvent:** When a `DataContractDeactivatedEvent` occurs, the function removes the permissions from the consuming data product to access the output port of the producing data product. This will skip events, if no corresponding policy ist found. The data contract in Data Mesh Manager is tagged with `aws-integration` and `aws-integration-inactive`.
- **Extra Information:** To effectively process the events, the function may retrieve additional information from the Data Mesh Manager API. This information includes details about the data contract, data products involved, and the teams associated with them.

## Usage
### Prerequisites
- [Terraform](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/aws-get-started/install-cli)
- [AWS CLI](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/getting-started-install.html)
- [Python3.10](https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-3100/)

### Prepare your data products
To allow the integration to work, your data products in Data Mesh manager must contain some metadata in their [custom fields](https://docs.datamesh-manager.com/dataproducts).

#### Consumer Data Product
A consuming data product requires information about its AWS IAM role. We use the notation of the [data product specification](https://github.com/datamesh-architecture/dataproduct-specification) here.
```yaml
dataProductSpecification: 0.0.1
info:
  id: example_consumer_id
  name: Example Consumer Data Product
owner:
  teamId: example_team_id
custom:
  aws-role-name: <AWS_ROLE_NAME>
```

#### Provider Data Product
A providing data product requires information about AWS ARNs of its output ports. Which ARNs are required depends on the type of the output port.
We use the notation of the [data product specification](https://github.com/datamesh-architecture/dataproduct-specification) here.

Your custom fields must always contain a field named `output-port-type`. See examples for valid options.

You can configure the [ARNs](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/reference-arns.html) of the required resources by adding custom fields starting with "aws" and ending with "arn". Actually all the text in between does not matter, but must be unique. We recommend to use the field names provided by the examples. 

#### S3 Bucket
```yaml
dataProductSpecification: 0.0.1
info:
  id: example_provider_id
  name: Example Provider Data Product
owner:
  teamId: example_team_id
outputPorts:
  - id: example_output_port_id
    custom:
      output-port-type: s3_bucket
      aws-s3-bucket-arn: <S3_BUCKET_ARN>
```

#### Glue Table
```yaml
dataProductSpecification: 0.0.1
info:
  id: example_provider_id
  name: Example Provider Data Product
owner:
  teamId: example_team_id
outputPorts:
  - id: example_output_port_id
    custom:
      output-port-type: glue_table
      aws-athena-workgroup-arn: <ATHENA_WORKGROUP_ARN>
      aws-glue-catalog-arn: <AWS_GLUE_CATALOG_ARN>
      aws-glue-database-arn: <AWS_GLUE_DATABASE_ARN>
      aws-glue-table-arn: <AWS_GLUE_TABLE_ARN>
      aws-s3-aws-s3-folder-arn: <S3_FOLDER_ARN>
```


### Deployment 
- **Setup Terraform Variables:** An example of a minimum configuration can be found [here](terraform%2Fterraform.tfvars.template). Copy this file and name the copy `terraform.tfvars`. Set your credentials.
- **Login Into AWS:** Login into your AWS account [through the cli](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/signin/latest/userguide/command-line-sign-in.html)
- **Run The CICD Script:** [This script](cicd.sh) is an example of what a CICD pipeline would look like to run this on AWS. This script requires you to set a version for the lambda source code. E.g. `./cicd.sh v0.0.1`

## Licenses

This project is distributed under the MIT License. It includes various open-source dependencies, each governed by its respective license.

For more details, please refer to the [LICENSES](LICENSES) file.

Commit message:

Adpapt data usage agreement naming

README.md, after:

# Data Mesh Manager - AWS Integration

This repository contains a complete setup, which allows you to integrate the [Data Mesh Manager](https://www.datamesh-manager.com/) into  an AWS account.
It uses only serverless AWS functionality like Lambda, CloudWatch, S3, Secretsmanager and SQS.
The infrastructure is set up by using Terraform.

## Limitations
- We do not handle deleted data usage agreements. So make sure to deactivate data usage agreements before deleting them. Otherwise, permissions will be kept existent.
- Not all kinds of output ports are supported at this point. Currently, we support the following:
  - S3 Buckets
  - Glue Tables (accessed by using Athena)

## Architecture
For a better understanding of how the integration works, see this simple architecture diagram. Arrows show access direction.

```
                                       ┌─────────────────┐
                                       │                 │
                                       │Data Mesh Manager│
                                       │                 │
                                       └─────────────────┘
                                          ▲           ▲
                                          │           │
                                          │           │
┌─────────────────────────────────────────┼───────────┼─────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                                         │           │                                         │
│                                         │           │ 4. read usage agreement information     │
│                     1. pull events      │           │ 6. write policy information + tag       │
│              ┌──────────────────────────┘           └──────────────────────────┐              │
│              │                                                                 │              │
│              │                                                                 │              │
│              │                                                                 │              │
│     ┌────────┴────────┐                ──────────── ──                ┌────────┴────────┐     │
│     │    poll_feed    │   2. write    │ dmm_events │  │  3. trigger   │  handle_events  │     │
│     │                 ├──────────────►│            │  ├──────────────►│                 │     │
│     │[Lambda Function]│               │ [SQS Queue]│  │               │[Lambda Function]│     │
│     └─────────────────┘                ──────────── ──                └────────┬────────┘     │
│                                                                                │              │
│                                                                                │5. manage     │
│                                                                                │              │
│                                                                                ▼              │
│                                                                        ┌────────────────┐     │
│                                                                        │                │     │
│                                                                        │  IAM Policies  │     │
│                                                                        │                │     │
│                                                                        └────────────────┘     │
│                                                                                               │
│                                                                                               │
│                                                                              [AWS Integration]│
└───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

### Architecture Decision Records
- [adr-001-terraform-and-serverless.md](adr%2Fadr-001-terraform-and-serverless.md)
- [adr-002-idempotent-event-processing.md](adr%2Fadr-002-idempotent-event-processing.md)
- [adr-003-prefer-inline-policies-for-aws-iam.md](adr%2Fadr-003-prefer-inline-policies-for-aws-iam.md)
- [adr-004-save-metadata-to-data-mesh-manager.md](adr%2Fadr-004-save-metadata-to-data-mesh-manager.md)
- [adr-005-fifo-queue-in-sqs.md](adr%2Fadr-005-fifo-queue-in-sqs.md)

## Lambdas
### [Poll Feed](src%2Fpoll_feed%2Flambda_handler.py)
- **Execution:** The function runs every minute, scheduled using an AWS Cloud Watch Rule.
- **Reading Events from Data Mesh Manager:** It reads all unprocessed [events from the Data Mesh Manager API](https://docs.datamesh-manager.com/events). 
- **Sending Events to SQS:** These events are then sent to an SQS queue for further processing. 
- **Tracking Last Event ID:** To ensure proper resumption of processing, the function remembers the last event ID by storing it in an S3 object. This allows subsequent executions of the function to start processing from the correct feed position.

### [Handle Events](src%2Fhandle_events%2Flambda_handler.py)
- **Execution:** The function is triggered by new events in the SQS queue.
- **Filtering Relevant Events:** The function selectively processes events based on their type. It focuses on events of the type `DataUsageAgreementActivatedEvent` and `DataUsageAgreementDeactivatedEvent`.
- **DataUsageAgreementActivatedEvent:** When a `DataUsageAgreementActivatedEvent` occurs, the function creates IAM policies. These policies allow access from a producing data product's output port to a consuming data product. The data usage agreement in Data Mesh Manager is tagged with `aws-integration` and `aws-integration-active`.
- **DataUsageAgreementDeactivatedEvent:** When a `DataUsageAgreementDeactivatedEvent` occurs, the function removes the permissions from the consuming data product to access the output port of the producing data product. This will skip events, if no corresponding policy ist found. The data usage agreement in Data Mesh Manager is tagged with `aws-integration` and `aws-integration-inactive`.
- **Extra Information:** To effectively process the events, the function may retrieve additional information from the Data Mesh Manager API. This information includes details about the data usage agreement, data products involved, and the teams associated with them.

## Usage
### Prerequisites
- [Terraform](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/aws-get-started/install-cli)
- [AWS CLI](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/getting-started-install.html)
- [Python3.10](https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-3100/)

### Prepare your data products
To allow the integration to work, your data products in Data Mesh manager must contain some metadata in their [custom fields](https://docs.datamesh-manager.com/dataproducts).

#### Consumer Data Product
A consuming data product requires information about its AWS IAM role. We use the notation of the [data product specification](https://github.com/datamesh-architecture/dataproduct-specification) here.
```yaml
dataProductSpecification: 0.0.1
info:
  id: example_consumer_id
  name: Example Consumer Data Product
owner:
  teamId: example_team_id
custom:
  aws-role-name: <AWS_ROLE_NAME>
```

#### Provider Data Product
A providing data product requires information about AWS ARNs of its output ports. Which ARNs are required depends on the type of the output port.
We use the notation of the [data product specification](https://github.com/datamesh-architecture/dataproduct-specification) here.

Your custom fields must always contain a field named `output-port-type`. See examples for valid options.

You can configure the [ARNs](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/reference-arns.html) of the required resources by adding custom fields starting with "aws" and ending with "arn". Actually all the text in between does not matter, but must be unique. We recommend to use the field names provided by the examples. 

#### S3 Bucket
```yaml
dataProductSpecification: 0.0.1
info:
  id: example_provider_id
  name: Example Provider Data Product
owner:
  teamId: example_team_id
outputPorts:
  - id: example_output_port_id
    custom:
      output-port-type: s3_bucket
      aws-s3-bucket-arn: <S3_BUCKET_ARN>
```

#### Glue Table
```yaml
dataProductSpecification: 0.0.1
info:
  id: example_provider_id
  name: Example Provider Data Product
owner:
  teamId: example_team_id
outputPorts:
  - id: example_output_port_id
    custom:
      output-port-type: glue_table
      aws-athena-workgroup-arn: <ATHENA_WORKGROUP_ARN>
      aws-glue-catalog-arn: <AWS_GLUE_CATALOG_ARN>
      aws-glue-database-arn: <AWS_GLUE_DATABASE_ARN>
      aws-glue-table-arn: <AWS_GLUE_TABLE_ARN>
      aws-s3-aws-s3-folder-arn: <S3_FOLDER_ARN>
```


### Deployment 
- **Setup Terraform Variables:** An example of a minimum configuration can be found [here](terraform%2Fterraform.tfvars.template). Copy this file and name the copy `terraform.tfvars`. Set your credentials.
- **Login Into AWS:** Login into your AWS account [through the cli](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/signin/latest/userguide/command-line-sign-in.html)
- **Run The CICD Script:** [This script](cicd.sh) is an example of what a CICD pipeline would look like to run this on AWS. This script requires you to set a version for the lambda source code. E.g. `./cicd.sh v0.0.1`

## Licenses

This project is distributed under the MIT License. It includes various open-source dependencies, each governed by its respective license.

For more details, please refer to the [LICENSES](LICENSES) file.
